I investigated whether there is a difference in the level of semantic similarity
of the sentence containing an anaphor and the sentence containing its
antecedent, and the anaphor sentence and other nearby sentences. The purpose was
to see if semantic similarity can be used to determine the sentence containing
an anaphor’s antecedent from a group of candidate sentences. Sentence similarity
was calculated between pairs of sentences by combining scores for various
WordNet similarity measures between nouns and between verbs in each sentence, as
well as Google’s word2vec using the large Google News model.

It was hypothesized that anaphors are used to change topics and move the
discourse forward, and so the semantic similarity of the anaphor and antecedent
sentences would be low.

However, it was found that the antecedent sentence typically had greater
semantic similarity to the anaphor sentence than other close preceding
sentences. The average for antecedent sentences was 0.5497 compared to 0.4301
for other candidates (scored on a [0, 1] scale) and a t-test gives p < 0.00001,
  so the difference is significant. The results are similar for each shell noun
  taken separately. The data includes roughly 300 cases where the anaphor and
  antecedent occur in the same sentence, which obviously results in a very high
  similarity score between the antecedent and anaphor sentences, but removing
  these cases still gives similar results (average similarity score of 0.4862
  for antecedent sentences and 0.4266 for other candidates, p < 0.00001).

    In the dataset that was used, between 1 and 4 potential antecedent sentences
    (candidates) were given. 49.04% of the time the sentence containing the
    actual antecedent was the most similar sentence to the sentence containing
    the anaphor (42.66% ignoring cases where the anaphor and antecedent occur in
    the same sentence); the remainder of the time it was another candidate
    sentence. Given that most anaphors had more than 2 candidates, this
    represents an improvement over chance for determining the antecedent
    sentence from the pool of candidates. Conversely, the antecedent sentence
    was ranked least similar to the anaphor sentence only 15.69% of the time
    (all cases) and 18.31% of the time (ignoring cases where the anaphor
    sentence is the same as the antecedent sentence).

    Antecedent sentences with very low semantic similarity scores to their
    anaphor sentences (< 0.15) were almost all short questions with anaphor
    sentences that expanded upon them in some detail. For example, the
    antecedent sentence “Now what?” and the anaphor sentence “This question may
    have particular resonance at the moment for Miss Lipinski, who at 15 is the
    youngest Olympic champion in the history of figure skating, and the many
    other athletes who recently left Nagano in triumph.” with score 0.0132.
    Antecedent sentences with very high semantic similarity scores to their
    anaphor sentences (excluding those where the antecedent and anaphor sentence
    were the same) were longer, and the anaphor sentences did not segue much if
    at all into other topics. For example, the antecedent sentence “Now, once
    again, just as I asked the question in reference to Ms. Lewinsky, it appears
    to me that this is an extraordinary question to ask the President of the
    United States.” and anaphor sentence “What led you to ask this question to
    the President?” with score 0.8419.

    There are several limitations to the approach that was used. First, only
    verbs and nouns were considered for all the WordNet similarity measures,
    ignoring potentially useful information in other words in the sentence such
    as adjectives. Also, the length of the sentence (the number of nouns and
    verbs it contains) affects the similarity score, since the similarities
    between words are averaged to generate the sentence similarity. Finally, all
    the sentences used were from a news source, so the results may not apply to
    other genres.
